---
title: Managing technical debt
description:
  Not all debt is bad, but technical debt generally tends to suck more than most
  other kinds of debt
date: 2023-07-26
tag: Architecture
---

<InlineImage
  containerClassName="mx-0 lg:mx-0"
  src="https://res.cloudinary.com/dinypqsgl/image/upload/v1690343493/blog/scott-graham-5fNmWej4tAA-unsplash_vlsarc.jpg"
  alt="A picture of management by Scott Graham"
/>

The beginning of my career was blessed by the fact that I never really had to
deal with code that other people had written (at least not directly). When I
began my career, I started off working at an agency, and if you've ever worked
at an agency before, you're aware of the fact that the work is primarily project
based. Meaning, once I was done writing the code for a specific project, I
wasn't on the hook for maintenance (there was no technical debt that I ever had
to pay down). This sounds great, but there were trade-offs with this no tech
debt way of working; hardcore deadlines and sleepless nights being but two of
the negative aspects of this kind of project work.

Even when I transitioned to being a product developer at Mastercard, everything
I worked on was greenfield; I started everything from a clean slate. I was
fortunate in this regard -- I didn't have to deal with technical debt for a
large portion of my career üòè! "However, when I was eventually confronted with
technical debt in the real world, I was utterly astonished by the extent of its
presence in numerous high-profile applications and businesses.

So let's talk a little about how I learned to manage, mitigate, and pay down
technical debt üôèüèΩ!

## What is technical debt

<InlineImage
  lazyLoadImage
  containerClassName="mx-0 lg:mx-0"
  src="https://res.cloudinary.com/dinypqsgl/image/upload/v1690343497/blog/jp-valery-hfrDZAXwb5c-unsplash_qw3ty4.jpg"
  alt="A picture of burning money by JP Valery"
/>

Technical debt, at least in the context of this blog post, refers to decisions
that engineering teams make in order to expedite the delivery of features. At a
granular level, continuing to use and expand up class components that exist in a
React codebase instead of trying to write new components using hooks (reusing
old outdated patterns) is a decision that adds technical debt. At a higher level
of abstraction, continuing to work with and utilize a custom built fullstack
framework (that is poorly documented) instead of using a prebuilt solution like
[NextJS](https://nextjs.org/) or

[Remix](https://remix.run/) is another form of technical debt. Don't get me
wrong, the custom built solution works... but it's clunky and hard for to reason
about and this very same thing can be said about React class components.

<Callout
  type="success"
  title="It's not all bad!"
  description="tech debt is a trade off between speed of delivery and code quality."
/>

Now, why do we call technical debt "technical debt"? Well, similar to debt in
the real world, technical debt accrues interest and the longer that we wait to
pay off this debt, the more the interest will compound. Now the interest I'm
referring to isn't monetary in nature (like that of your mortgage üòÖ) but a more
intangible interest. This "interest" results in engineers spending more time
fighting with the codebase instead of actually focusing on delivering value to
users. As the technical debt accrues interest, it becomes increasingly more
frustrating and tedious for engineers to work on solving problems; their focus
shifts from "let me deliever value" to "please lady luck, don't let me break
anything during my deployment".

Please keep in mind, I'll be talking about technical debt and how I've seen it
manifest inside frontend codebases. I'm sure the discussion I'm having below
will be applicable to other parts of the stack but since I am a frontend
developer (at least for right now), I'll be focusing on the frontend.

## Paying down the debt

<Callout type="alert" title="Fire is not always the answer!" />

By this point, we should all be on the same page about what technical debt is
(at least at a high level), and the next obvious question is, "now what"? My
trite response is let's talk about figuring out how to go about paying down this
debt.

<LazyGiphy
  containerClassName="w-[100%] pb-[100%] md:w-[50%] md:pb-[50%]"
  src="https://giphy.com/embed/p4wQuEvkP27fMt7f6y"
  giphyAttributionSrc="https://giphy.com/gifs/pudgypenguins-riot-torch-pitchfork-p4wQuEvkP27fMt7f6y"
/>

Last year I was exposed to a method in which a team can pay down technical debt
whilst still continuing to deliver value to their users. Oftentimes, our initial
visceral reaction to projects with severe technical debt--and this used to be my
reaction too by the way-- is to treat them like Frankenstein's monster... our
prescribed remedy is cleansing by fire üòÜ. While it would be great to be able to
start a project from scratch and rebuild an existing application from the
ground-up, sometimes it just isn't feasible. What do you mean Taran? We're
engineers! If we can dream it, we can do it! Well yes, you're right, technically
anything is feasible but I'm not only talking about technical feasibility.

Rewriting an entire application or sometimes an entire host of applications with
a brand new shiny framework just not make sense for the business, especially if
the business is risk averse. Writing software takes time and if you're rewriting
software and functionality that already exists, it's really tough to get buy in
from senior leadership that this is indeed required. Unless your technical debt
is so much so that it endangers the scalability of the business, I highly doubt
one would be able to sell a proposal for a rewrite up the entire chain of
command -- your manager might just stop you before you even try to convince
anyone else that it's a good idea. Don't forget, the time we spend working on
one thing is time we're spending not working on another thing.

<BlockQuote author="April Ludgate">
  Time is money, money is power, power is pizza, pizza is knowledge, let's go.
</BlockQuote>

So what is an engineer to do? How do we deal with this technical debt,
especially if the organization that you're working with is totally against a
ground-up rewrite. The answer: a phased migration!

## Phased migration

Now what do I mean by phased migration? Well just that... you migrate things...
in phases ü§£. Kidding aside, a phased migration is one in which where we pick
particular pieces of functionality/pieces of the codebase and start rewriting
(migrating) them over to an isolated area (the "clean" area) in a manner such
that they can still be consumed by the legacy bits of the application.

<InlineImage
  lazyLoadImage
  containerClassName="mx-0 lg:mx-0"
  src="https://res.cloudinary.com/dinypqsgl/image/upload/v1690344103/blog/legacy-and-new-code_aydlqx.png"
  alt="A picture of management by Scott Graham"
/>

The phased migration I'm in favour of is one in which we start by picking out
leaf nodes and working our way up the depedency tree. Rewriting entire routes or
large components of an application is no easy feat and will require turns of
time, however, if you break down the depedency tree into leaf nodes and start
leaf by leaf, pretty soon you'll have rewritten quite a large chunk of your
codebase without you even realizing it.

After the completion of the leaf nodes, we move up to the parent nodes and begin
migrating those over to the new paradigm. It's a recursive cleanup of tech debt!
There's a lot of different ways this manifests in a codebase and I'll leave the
implementation up to you, but if you're interested in how I'm attempting to do
it at my current workplace, it's via NX. It's actually quite easy to plop NX
into an existing application and the suite of tools it ships with and sensible
defaults they provided you really make it easy to get started partioning out
your codebase into "legacy" and "new". With NX, anything that's inside the libs
directory is considered new and anything that's inside of the src directory
would be considered legacy.

The level of effort thats associated with this migration strategy is lower than
a ground-up rewrite but the trade-off is that it'll take way longer to have
reach a state of minimal tech debt. Regardless, engineers will end up being
happier since they are getting to write shiny good clean code and the business
will stay happy because we didn't have to throw everything that was written a
few years ago into the trash.

### How did NX help with my tech debt at work

The code for my works primary project exists in an `src` folder. There are a ton
of components, business logic, and state management files spread across this one
directory. Not only that, but the project itself was also configured to use
`tslint` and `enzyme`; both libraries that have been deprecated and should no
longer be used.

The way in which NX enabled me to start writing brand new features using modern
tech while not having to migrate every component at once was via the usage of nx
libs. NX is a suite of monorepo tools that provides users with a CLI to generate
new libraries, in addition to having a cache that stores the result of various
output commands (like your test and lint commands).

Once my colleagues and I had agreed to break our project into domains and
subdomains, we created separate NX libs for each subdomain. For example, we have
a `product-presentation` domain, a `search` domain, and... sigh, an `ads`
domain; each domain was assigned a corresponding lib.

The command to generate a react lib is: `npx nx g @nx/react:library`.

Another thing that NX helped us to do was enforce module boundaries. In the
legacy `src` folder, presentational components are coupled with data access
components and utility functions are scattered all over the place. By embracing
NX's prescribed best practices and

[Project Boundaries](https://nx.dev/core-features/enforce-project-boundaries) my
team and I were able to enforce best practices by making engineers embrace the
creation of cohesive units. The enforcement happens at the linting level
(`eslint` will yell if you don't follow proper module scoping) and at the PR
level; a combination of man and machine üòÜ.

NX is deserving of its own blog post and I can't do it justice in this single
entry alone. Please standby for me to give a meetup presentation and record it.

## How do I manage tech debt

**Tech debt comes and goes; accept that it exists and that it's just something
that you need to manage**. There's two things I know for sure when it comes to
tech debt; tech debt always comes back (and that's okay üòä) and tech debt comes
back at an excelerated rate if teams do not have a sense of ownership over their
destiny. Truly, autonomy and responsibility are two factors that can help
contribute to keeping tech debt at pay.

<BlockQuote>
  I slept and dreamt that life was joy. I awoke and saw that life was service. I
  acted and behold, service was joy.
</BlockQuote>

It really comes down to process, not discipline. I repeat, do not rely on
discipline to maintain code standards and to keep tech debt at bay. Discipline
breaks down and engineers tend to skew towards laziness and for these reasons
alone, relying solely on discipline is an incorrect approach toward software
development. We need to put tooling in place (like linting, proper code reviews,
codeowner files) that enables us to embrace a coherent approach to software
development. In fact, these things are not new concepts; codeowners have been a
thing on github since 2017!

## Closing Thoughts

Hopefully you found this post helpful! I'm a novice at handling technical debt
but I'm grateful for having had the opportunity to share my experience with you.
Hopefully it'll give you some hope when you're dealing with your own version of
"Frankenstein"... remember, fire is not always the answer! üòÜ
