---
title: A Mind for Numbers
subtitle:
  Learn how to best manage your mind for optimal efficiency when problem
  solving!
date: 2021-07-31
description:
  Gain the secret insights of how to efficiently learn, not only math and
  science, but also any subject matter as a whole.
tag: Random
---

<Callout
  type="warning"
  title="Disclaimer"
  description="these are just MY key takeaways"
/>

If you haven't guessed, yes, [A Mind for Numbers](https://amzn.to/3f7AfLr) is
the motivation for this blog post ðŸ˜œ.

Similar to my approach to [Mortgages in Canada](./7-canadian-mortgages/), I'm
going to provide some of my key take-aways as the subject matert is still fresh
in my mind. I can't recommend it enough, but if you're looking for a quick
reference (talking to you, Future Taran ðŸ˜†), I'd suggest starting here.

## The Two Modes Of Thinking

Innantely, at a biological level, we know that there are certain states of being
that we're able to enter when certain situations arise. But what are these
patterns of thinking? Can I tap into them at will? What are the benefits of one
type of thinking over another? I've pondered these questions for a bit and I've
learned, throughout my 28 years on this earth, that I'm either thinking freely
and creatively about a problem or I'm thinking narrowly, or as others have
referred to it, thinking in a "flow" state where I'm completely immersed in what
I'm doing and the task at hand.

[A Mind for Numbers](https://amzn.to/3f7AfLr) describes these two modes of
thinking as [Focus Mode](#focus-mode) and [Diffus Mode](#diffuse-mode)
respectively.

<InlineImage
  src="https://res.cloudinary.com/dinypqsgl/image/upload/v1671744983/blog/pinball.jpg"
  alt="bumper"
/>

### Focus Mode

Referring to the above image, if we imagine our mind to be like a game of
pinball, focus mode would be akin to a game in which there are multiple crowded
bumpers in the game area (the left most diagram). A thought (the ball in our
analogy) will bounce off multiple bumpers in a localized region. The closer
bumpers are telling of the fact that we're able to focus more on a precise
thought and therefore concentrate on a concept that we already have down pat.

When we're focusing on something, the prefrontal cortex sends out signals that
links neural pathways along the brain that are related to what you're currently
working on. When we first approach a problem, we usually approach the problem
with the focus mode switched on. We read the text, look over notes, scour Google
for an answer, think back to previous problems we've faced in the area and
attempt to utilize past experience and patterns to solve the problem. This is
generally great, but for problems where changing one variable or some key
details drastically changes the approach and/or solution, relying on focus mode
becomes problematic.

When dealing with subject matter which employs abstract concepts, focus mode
becomes more effortful. An example of an abstract concept would be the idea of
love. We try our best to define it with words, display it with our actions, but
it is not physically possible to point at an object and say "that is love" --
there's no real life model. Don't come at me with some BS about how you "love"
your friends and family. Bitch, I can't point to that and say objectively that
that is love ðŸ¤£. In the world of computer science the idea of a stack is also an
abstract concept.... there's no real life model of a "stack" where someone is
popping and pushing stuff onto it. Before you come at me with the whole stack of
pancakes analogy, I'm not saying pancake stacks are not real, but a stack in
computer science is an **abstract** data type. IT'S IN THE NAME!

Another related problem to subject matter which employs abstract concepts is the
**Einstellung** effect (pronounced "EYE-stellung"). Basically, this means that
you'll focus on your initial thought so much, that you won't be able to see
better more elegant solutions. The difference between a master and the student
is that the master will spend, on average, more time attempting to understand
the context regarding a problem/issue before trying to jump into creating a
solution. The student will jump right into trying to find solution without
allowing themselves the time needed to truly comprehend what they're looking at.

Don't do yourself a disservice by jumping straight into solving a problem. Think
about it. Allow yourself the time to ruminate. Play around.

### Diffuse Mode

Sticking with the pinball analogy, then diffuse mode would be akin to a game in
which there are a minimal amount of bumpers for our pinball to hit; this means
that the ball can travel quite a long path before hitting the next bumper and
can traverse in such a way that it can travel throughout the entire game area
with minimal issue.

This is how diffuse mode operates. A thought (the pinball) is able to traverse a
large portion of your neural network and make connections that aren't
necessarily straightforward. When we're facing a brand new problem that we
haven't seen before, or an enemy that we've never faced in battle, there's no
existing neural pattern that we can lean on... we need to be flexible!

Diffuse mode allows for you to think in a "big picture" kind of way, grapple
with new theories, and apply previous experiences from different areas of your
life to the problem you're working on or concept you're trying to understand.
This is why procrastination is such a bitch. Not only are you stressing yourself
out by not doing the work but the act of putting off doing the work is robbing
you of the time that you'd normally use to enter diffuse mode thinking and
exploration because you just have to finish whatever the hell it is that you
need to finish.

Diffuse mode is also great for another reason... it does work in the background
for you! Have you ever been working through a difficult problem for hours on end
to eventually hit a wall and get stumped to only arrive at the exact solution
you were searching for while doing something mundane like cleaning your car or
going for a walk? Well, baby, that was diffuse mode working in the background.

<div
  style={{width: '60%', height: 0, paddingBottom: '34%', position: 'relative'}}
>
  <iframe
    data-src="https://giphy.com/embed/APbMklGCGIE1BKcz9F"
    width="100%"
    height="100%"
    frameBorder="0"
    style={{position: 'absolute'}}
    className="lazy giphy-embed"
    allowFullScreen
  ></iframe>
</div>
[via GIPHY](https://giphy.com/gifs/brooklynninenine-season-6-nbc-brooklyn-nine-APbMklGCGIE1BKcz9F)

Moreover, diffuse mode is how we learn at deep and creative levels. When we're
hyper focused, it becomes very difficult for us to see the forest, we're too
preoccupied with the trees. How are you supposed to internalize a tree data
structure when you're too focused on how you want to go about creating the nodes
and how best to link them. Before you jump into an implementation, it just makes
more sense to understand the big picture and the overall goal.

In a nutshell, that's diffuse mode and it's marvelous. Like Bruce Lee said,
**all knowledge is self knowledge**.

## Accessing the two modes and how to best learn

It's all well and good to know what these two modes of thinking are so that you
could impress your friends and family, but I'm all about practicality. It does
me little good to know about these two modes and not know how to somewhat
influence my state of being.

### Best practices

When first approaching a problem, utilize focus mode to begin grappling with the
situation at hand. After that initial struggle, you'll want to slip into a
diffuse state to allow your mind to access other areas of your neural network
and explore new possibilities.

But Taran, that's all well and good, but how the heck do I do that? Friend, calm
down, I'll tell you how.

#### Pomodoro

The pomodoro method is a time management technique that involves breaking down
your work into intervals, traditionally 25 minutes in length, separated by short
breaks. You basically focus on some piece of work and then take short 5 minute
breaks in between. During the 25 minutes of work, you must shut off all
distractions--messaging apps, Facebook, Twitter, Netflix, etc.-- and focus
solely on doing the _damn_ work.

After that 25 minute block of work, stop... HAMMER TIME.

<div
  style={{width: '30%', height: 0, paddingBottom: '30%', position: 'relative'}}
>
  <iframe
    data-src="https://giphy.com/embed/3o6vY2d5BHuhaZTXFe"
    width="100%"
    height="100%"
    frameBorder="0"
    style={{position: 'absolute'}}
    className="lazy giphy-embed"
    allowFullScreen
  ></iframe>
</div>
<p>
  [ via GIPHY
  ](https://giphy.com/gifs/brooklynninenine-season-6-nbc-brooklyn-nine-APbMklGCGIE1BKcz9F)
</p>

Okay so it's not hammer time ðŸ™Š, but it's break time for sure. The purpose of
this break is to disengage with the thing you're grappling with and allow
yourself to enter diffuse mode. While we can't really actively control when we
enter/exit diffuse mode, we can do things that kind of nudge ourselves in the
direction. For example, you could meditate, take a walk, or listen to some music
without any lyrics. It's also acceptable to engage in some idle chit chat with
coworkers but make sure the chit chat isn't too intense or heartfelt, or else
you might just end up back in focus mode.

I've been utilizing the pomodoro method for the past two weeks and I gotta say,
and this is just me talking here, I feel pretty damn good after work! I have
more energy and honestly feel like I've done a better job than those days where
I sit at the screen for 4 hours trying to figure out why that damn scrollbar
won't disappear in my React app. In fact, whilst writing this blog post, I've
been utilizing pomodoro. How's that for an application of our learning future
Taran? Huh, Taran? What do you think? Taran loves learning. Almost as much as
Terry loves love.

<div
  style={{width: '60%', height: 0, paddingBottom: '34%', position: 'relative'}}
>
  <iframe
    data-src="https://giphy.com/embed/yoJC2Kvz5mipkBYeHK"
    width="100%"
    height="100%"
    frameBorder="0"
    style={{position: 'absolute'}}
    className="lazy giphy-embed"
    allowFullScreen
  ></iframe>
</div>
<p>
  [ via GIPHY ](https://giphy.com/gifs/foxtv-brooklyn-nine-yoJC2Kvz5mipkBYeHK)
</p>

I know what you're thinking... you've heard about the pomodoro method for year
and you've never tried it. Maybe you think that it's a waste of time and that
you're taking too many breaks throughout the day. Maybe you think that you won't
be able to get any real work done in 25 minute increments. Hell, that was me
back in the day too. However, if you're anything like me, knowing the **why**
behind an idea makes you more likely to accept and implement it.

At the end of the day, we're not being paid (if you're employed) for the amount
of hours we put in (assuming the type of work you're doing) is not menial in
nature. We get paid to work efficiently and effectively. The pomodoro allows
just this. Moreover, and this is important, the pomodoro method teaches you a
valuable lesson: **process over product**.

Have you ever struggled with starting an assignment or some sort of work? Has a
task ever felt so daunting that because of these negative emotions, you put off
doing whatever it is that you're supposed to be doing. As much as I hate to
admit it, I too used to suffer with this shit (and still actively do). However,
once you engage this interleaved working style, you'll being to realize and
truly understand the proverb: "A journey of a thousand miles starts with a
single step".

During these blocks where you're actively just doing the work and attempting to
make progress, a funny thing happens.... YOU ACTUALLY MAKE PROGRESS. Sure, you
might not be done your homework assignment in 2 pomodoros, but you'll sure as
hell be a lot further along than having not done anything at all. Everything in
this life is done in increments. If you're a Christian, even God himself needed
6 days to create all of creation. If you're a Muslim, it wasn't just one prophet
that needed to be born, but thousands. My point is this: the important thing is
to start moving. Take the first step and the universe will lift your other foot
almost magically.

#### Interleaving practice and taking breaks

If you're learning a new concept or trying to memorize some new information
(perhaps how to conjugate verbs in another language), one thing that can be
really helpful is interleaving (spacing out) your practice sessions. The funny
thing about the brain is that even the act of _trying_ to remember something
helps in your learning. Struggling is helping you make progress? Crazy right.
Apps like [Anki](https://apps.ankiweb.net/) are great for this kinda thing. Test
taking also has been proven to help with learning since you're in a high
pressure situation and have to rely on your own memory and neurons to do the
heavy lifting and not Google.

Another thing that is super duper important is **taking breaks** (I'm talking to
you buddy, the one whose PS5 I used to play Bloodborne). When I say taking a
break, I don't mean stopping one task to go and do another task. If you're
working on some hard computer science problem and then as "a break" switch to
studying a new language, well first of all, srew you, and secondly, you're
taking breaks wrong. Contrary to popular belief, resting is **also** a part of
training. If you're working out regularly, you don't go to the gym and do biceps
every damn day. Your muscles need time to rest. Your mind is like one giant
bicep. IT NEEDS TO REST.

However, there's a difference between _resting_ and just flat out _not doing the
thing_. Use it or lose it holds true for neural connections. If you're not
actively attempting to remember/utilize some new found knowledge or skill, you
risk said knowledge not being moved into long-term memory and staying in
short-term only. Eventually, after enough reps, whatever thing you're trying to
understand + any other related concepts will create one cohesive chunk in your
brain.

Think about when you were first learning how to do addition and subtraction. You
struggled with these abstract concepts and really had to work hard memorize
that + meant add a thing with another thing and - meant remove a thing from
another thing. 2 + 2 = 4 looks god damn scary if you're a 4 year old. However,
we all eventually were able to grasp these concepts and created a mathematical
memory chunk in your brains. We only were able to do this because we grappled
with addition on the regular at school.

### Pitfalls to avoid

If there's best practices, how the hell could there not be pitfalls to avoid
lol.

#### Illusions of competence

Simply put, don't fool yourself into thinking that you know how a thing works
without actually going through the steps to verify your understanding. Hey you,
future Taran, yeah, you. Just because you watched a couple videos on the various
services that AWS offers, doesn't mean you actually **know** what the hell
you're talking about or that you could even explain the why and what for every
service. Human's trick themselves into thinking they can read a chapter in a
book and "just get it" and be able to pass a test. Bitch, you just read a thing
and have it in short term memory. If you don't have the textbook in front of you
or some sort of prompt, you can bet your ass you won't be able to remember the
thing you just read.

Moreover, if you're working through a problem and you just **feel it in your
bones** that you're right, that's great, but you still need to verify
everything. Focus mode tends to be abundantly optimistic and therefore open to
issues. We need to play the Devil's Advocate and ask... does the thing I'm
actually trying to do make sense? Look for inconsistencies. Side note, I suck at
this currently and am working on it (I'm naturally a positive person ðŸ˜Š).

#### Just five more minutes!

If you have strong discipline and strive to achieve great things in your life,
you'll struggle with pulling yourself away from your work. I suffer from this.
Whenever the timer goes off, I have to fight my knee jerk reaction to say to
myself "Five more minutes... I almost got the solution..." but the the thing
is... five minutes is never five minutes... it usually ends up being five hours
ðŸ˜±. Trust the process and do the smart thing... walk away... just walk away.

<div
  style={{width: '50%', height: 0, paddingBottom: '35%', position: 'relative'}}
>
  <iframe
    data-src="https://giphy.com/embed/3o6ZtkR0NbWzgGPgcg"
    width="100%"
    height="100%"
    style={{position: 'absolute'}}
    frameBorder="0"
    style={{position: 'absolute'}}
    className="lazy giphy-embed"
    allowFullScreen
  ></iframe>
</div>
<p>[ via GIPHY ](https://giphy.com/gifs/southparkgifs-3o6ZtkR0NbWzgGPgcg)</p>

#### Procrastination

Just don't do it. I know. It sucks working on stuff you really don't want to but
you know what, I know it'll be difficult and that the thing you're doing might
not be as fun as watching Brooklyn 99 or hanging with your friends, but it's
profusely important.

Procrastination occurs because negative feelings rise up when we think about the
effort and feelings we'll experience when we have to do something we don't
**really** want to do. That's okay. That's normal. The important thing is what
you do after these negative emotions arise. The knee jerk reaction is to do
something more pleasant like jumping on Netflix or calling up a friend or gaming
but these things are just distractions and hurting you more than they're helping
you. You're slowly building up a habit of avoiding things and running from
discomfort. Don't do that. At the other end of discomfort is everything that
you've ever wanted.

## Closing Thoughts

You can't always be going 100 miles per hour when you're trying to learn
something new. You also can't be lolly gagging around since learning is an
active endeavor. You need to find the balance. You need to employ both
strategies.

**Go hard when you need to go hard and pull back when necessary. You can't
always be sprinting through life**.
