---
title: CSS - getting back to basics
description:
  I've been so focused on a11y things at work, I started to feel real rusty (üòµ‚Äçüí´)
  when I was writing CSS
subtitle:
  I knew I had a problem when I found myself frantically tossing Tailwind
  classes at a carousel, praying for the layout gods to fix it.
date: 2025-02-28
tag: css
draft: true
---

So before you go any further, I want you to know, dear reader (probably myself
lol), this blog post is meant to be a reflection piece on how I developed a
problem, and my chosen path forward for addressing said problem.

f you ever find yourself in my shoes, my dear brother (and sisters, who I also
consider my brothers), I want you to know that it's completely okay -- we can
come back from this.

## Context

Man oh man, I never thought that this would happen to me, but I've found that my
skills -- specifically my skills as they pertain to CSS -- have begun to atrophy
üòî. Now, I'm not saying that I've completely forgotten how to write CSS -- I
haven't -- but the clarity I once had around my mental models of different
layout algorithms and the interplay of different properties has definitely
diminished.

You might be wondering what the tell-tale sign was that indicated that I needed
a refresher. It was when had I found myself struggling to utilize `flexbox` to
create a carousel component with `embla`. It is not as if I had no idea what I
was doing, but I was throwing random properties at the problem, hoping a
Tailwind class would magically fix it. **If you ever find yourself coding with
desperation and hoping for the best, it's time to take a serious step back.**

## How did I get here?

Looking back on it, I'm not surprised that I ended up here -- heck, you might
find yourself in a similar situation if you're not careful! My day to day work
had shifted from delivering brand new features and flexing my problem solving
skills to achieving strategic business objectives regarding accessibility
(a11y).

The government of Ontario is beefing up their web a11y requirements for
businesses that operate within their province, and while this undeniably is a
good thing because a more inclusive web is great, my colleagues and I have had
to bake in a11y features into some pretty old components and you can imagine how
that's been going... it's been a bit of a mad dash!

While accessibility work is critical, it became my entire focus. I spent more
time refactoring markup and optimizing screen reader flows than writing fresh
CSS. Over time, my problem-solving shifted from 'how do I structure this
layout?' to 'what ARIA attributes should I add'.

The work in and of itself is quite simple (most of the time), and it usually
revolves around restructuring markup so that it is more accessible to screen
readers, adding visual indicators for interactive elements, adding appropriate
keyboard and click handlers to elements, and other _simple_ but nonetheless
important things. But therein lies the problem... the work wasn't allowing me to
flex my creative problem solving skills and I found myself writing little to no
CSS for the better part of a year ü§Ø.

Even with my personal projects, this website for instance, most of the core
functionality I desire has already been built out and I'm not really looking to
add anything more, at least not right now. I've also got a lot less spare time
than I used to, what with my brothers and I starting a business together (I'll
write a blog post about this later üòÜ), and me rededicating myself to health and
fitness.

Before I knew it, I forgot how `flexbox` worked, like entirely... and you can
imagine how `grid` and I are doing as a couple (not great). When it came down to
it, and I'm not ashamed to admit it, I had adopted lazy habits and overall was
becoming a real lazy (in a bad way) developer. I found myself similar to Randy
from South Park when he was chasing the purple dragon...

<LazyGiphy
  containerClassName="w-[100%] pb-[56%] md:w-[50%] md:pb-[28%]"
  src="https://giphy.com/embed/l0HlPtbGpcnqa0fja"
  giphyAttributionSrc="https://giphy.com/gifs/pudgypenguins-aintmuch-aintmuchmoons-honnestworkmoon-qlKs0m0GxHN6ycbDmV"
/>

## Addressing the problem

If you know anything about me, anything at all, I hope it's this: _I believe in
starting with fundamental principles, as they serve as the foundation for all
the advanced techniques I aspire to master._ This goes beyond code -- it's
applicable to every area of my life.

- I was feeling rusty and wanted to address this at the base principles level
- Enter Josh W. Comeau's course.
